The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
The subject matter of the present show is early science fiction.
What one identifies as early science fiction, of course, depends upon what his definition
of science fiction is. If you want to call any literature a fantastic nature of science
fiction, then you'd have to go back to the beginning of human expression. Consider stories
of God's creation myths and early religions of science fiction, but we're not going to
go back that far. It's more useful to place the origins in science fiction, I think, much
further forward in history, at a time when the word science means something, and when
the naivete and superstitions of the ancient world have mostly given way to a truer, more
modern sense of reality. But to get to the present or further forward in history, we'll
have to pass over authors like Jonathan Swift, who wrote Gulliver's Travels, and Edgar Allen
Poe, both of whom were considered as writing early science fiction, and move up to 1817,
when Mary Shelley published what many critics would consider the first science fiction novel.
And that book was Frankenstein, and the reason it's considered the first science fiction
novel is that it uses science in the story, in that Frankenstein is a creature who is
built, who is put together out of, I guess you could say, spare parts, and then is brought
to life by its creator. Using the scientific forces of electricity
rather than some magical force that you might find in an earlier work.
But I think Shelley's treatment of material, Mary Shelley, just the way she handled it,
I think qualifies a novel to be one of science fiction. But at the time she wrote it, there
was no real separation between fantastic literature and realistic literature. There was no categorizing
process, and literature was simply literature. The origin of the term science fiction didn't
occur until the 1920s, and for various reasons it began to exist as a separate literary category.
But immediately before that time there were three major writers who had an immense influence
on the field, a Frenchman Jules Verne, an Englishman H. G. Wells, and an American Edgar
Rice Burroughs. Jules Verne was born in 1828 and published
his first science fiction book, Five Weeks in a Blune, in 1863.
A lot of people considered Verne to be a profit for seeing a lot of the technological things
that we have. Actually, I think he was more just a good science fiction writer. He took
a lot of concepts that were on the verge of coming about, things like the electric light,
the submarine and air travel, explorations that were going on. He took all of these elements,
some scientific, some geographical, and physics and other types of scientific accoutrements,
and blended them into an adventure story format. I think maybe this is one of the prime or
primal manifestations of science fiction as a form in itself.
You could almost say that for his own time he would be a hard science fiction writer,
in that almost all of his stories, as you say, they had a great deal of adventure or
reader interest, but they also were based on some sort of scientific concept. Say the
giant cannon in the book From the Earth to the Moon, from which they made a movie. He
goes into long explanations on the acceleration needed to reach the moon, the muzzle velocity
of the cannon to shoot the projectile. Really fairly definite science for his day.
That's true, although some of the science as seen today is, I guess you could call it,
a little dated, his cannon to shoot people to the moon. But many of the things he wrote
were very well thought out, such as in 20,000 leagues under the sea, his extremely powerful,
highly developed submarine that traveled around the world, mostly underwater, harkens to today's
nuclear power submarines. Of course he created an unforgettable character in that book, Captain
Nemo, almost the archetype of the mysterious, powerful scientist who is living by himself,
conducting experiments. I think that fascinates a lot of readers of the book and viewers of
course of the movie too. That's true, he was an extremely well developed character and
more is told about him in the sequel to 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, Mysterious Island.
In Mysterious Island we see a lighter vein of work that Vern was caught up in in a lot
of his earlier works, the Bohemian, Romantic type of castaway on a lost island somewhere.
Robinson Crusoe type stories, there are quite a few of these in his earlier works.
Yeah, that book in a way reminded me of Robinson Crusoe, the way that these castaways are able
to master their environment and save themselves with their inventions. Another book in that
vein, that kind of light vein, was a very little known work of Vern's, Dr. Ox's experiment
in 1874. It's sort of a farce, he predicates a story where a scientist accidentally injects
some sort of super oxygen mixture into a town and accelerates life where everybody suddenly
is accelerated into a faster pace of living. Around that time too he published off on a
comet. A comet collides with the earth, it just happens to carry off a little portion
of the earth with our heroes on it, they happen to be playing chess, they're carried off.
Sooner or later they get back to earth, the comet comes back and gets near earth, they're
able to sort of jump back on through a balloon. This sort of goes back to some earlier things,
earlier types of fantastic fiction that were written called, I guess for lack of a better
term, fantastic voyages where people go off on marvelous adventures like in his Around
the World in 80 Days where they travel around the world by various means in an 80 day time
period which for them was very, very quick. In his Off on a Comet where they travel off
of the earth because the comet collides with the earth and part of it is broken off. And
also in his story from Earth to the Moon where we travel from the earth to the moon
via a projectile shot from a cannon, all these have fantastic voyages in them which really
go back to a little earlier period of fantastic fiction.
Yeah, that's the category I think that a lot of Verne's fiction can be put in, the fantastic
voyage, the wonderful journey, something like that. Some of his later work is interesting
to the book in the early 1880s, The Steam House where he seemed to have extrapolated
a house trader which is pulled by mechanical elephants powered by steam which is sort of
an interesting idea. And also in the mid 1880s a book called, Robber the Conqueror, in that
book he did for helicopters or huge helicopter like airplanes what he did for submarines
in 20,000 leagues under the sea but he did it for the air.
Jules Verne brought his character, Robber, back in the novel Master of the World where
he depicts science and his main character is a little more sinister than he had in some
of his earlier work where the character is somewhat malevolent and science is not being
used for the good of mankind or at least for the benefit of mankind but is being used for
that one person's own gain.
In fact it seems like he sort of enjoyed toying with this concept in his later works. I think
there was one story even where he pitted a good outcome of science versus a bad outcome
of science and it seems like a lot of his later works are darker, more thoughtful about the
future of science in realistic terms.
Any moviegoer of course would recognize the fact that a lot of Verne's more popular novels
have been made into Hollywood movies. Five weeks in a balloon for instance was a well
known production from one of Verne's books. Around the world in 80 days of course is a
classic of filmmaking. Twenty thousand leagues under the sea done by Walt Disney of course
is a favorite especially with the kids. A Mysterious Island was another that was made
into a movie.
Yes, especially after the copyrights on Verne's works ran out around 1950 I think there was
a flurry of the movies of his works. One of the favorites I think of a lot of people
is Journey to the Center of the Earth. It was a milestone I think in the cinema in terms
of science fiction movies.
It had a lot of on location shooting and a lot of very extravagant special effects and
sets which really was one of the milestones of making at that time.
You could probably say that Jules Verne was the most popular and prolific writer of his
day. He wrote through the 1860's, 1870's, 1880's. He contributed much to the delight
of Europeans in science and technology. And probably what one critic said of Verne is true
that he was the first science fiction writer to make a living at the job and I don't think
science fiction would have been the same had it not been for the influence of Jules Verne.
There are many other people writing speculative fiction or science fiction during this period
but the next major writer was H.G. Wells who was born in 1866.
Yeah, Wells I think adds something to the field that Verne didn't spend much time with.
Wells can have just as much science and as much extrapolation as Verne did but I think
he adds some social criticism. He seems to ponder more on the social ramifications of
the inventions and things he talks about. For instance, his first great success in 1895
was the time machine in which he pictures a far future society which is not always the
positive place. So Wells was I guess you could say making a comment on Victorian England
with the Morlocks who were sort of I guess you could say the working class and the Eloy
who were the upper class and the strife and turmoil between the two different classes
only extrapolated into a far and rather grim future that he had speculated in his book
The Time Machine. Of course another one the War of the Worlds written a few years later
is one of the classic first contact novels and even though humanity came out okay it
was still not a it was a scare book it was not a pleasant book by any means.
And it's amazing the impact this novel has had on science fiction in general that being
the creation of the first of the the bug-eyed monsters and science fiction and science fiction
films have been full of them ever since. Yes many films have been made of Wells works
as well as Verne's works War of the Worlds, The Invisible Man, The Time Machine that we've
mentioned also First Men in the Moon was made into a movie that's another of his novels.
As was the Island of Dr. Moreau which if I recall was a extremely negative movie where
this I guess you'd call him a mad scientist is trying to make men out of animals and has
all sorts of creatures which are half and half a very scary negative book I think of
the misuse of science perhaps. Yes and also Food of the Gods is made into a motion picture
based upon that book and one of the most interesting of Wells's work made into a motion picture
was Things to Come based on his book Shape of Things to Come and he wrote the screenplay
for the movie. That's characteristic of a lot of his work The Shape of Things to Come
where you have some sort of holocaust or war where people are destroyed and for a long
time civilization well there is none it's a primitive world and out of that primitive
world some band of scientists or some heroic far-seeing people take over and bring humankind
back to where it should be it's sort of a oh ending ending up I guess you'd call it
almost a utopian book because it does have a positive ending. It's one of the the first
I guess we could say the first science fiction cataclysm novels too. Even at the time of
the making of the movie Wells knew that some of his inventions such as the cannon that
shot the ship into space was already out of date but they went ahead and used him anyway
because they're already a familiar figure used in literature. Oftentimes when Wells
envisioned the future as we remarked earlier he would present a negative picture of a future
society that was the case in the book when the sleeper wakes. You have a Rip Van Winkle
type who wakes up after two centuries and he wakes up into a world which is a dystopia.
Portion of it is useless rich people. Another portion is the mistreated poor. He's very
disillusioned when he wakes up into that sort of dystopian society. And also even in his
more popular work such as the Invisible Man oftentimes the scientific gimmick or the science
he has in the work is used for selfish reasons. In the Invisible Man if you remember the man
is not happy with his invisibility. It's almost as if Wells is saying if you wish for great
powers or if you wish for great abilities or science gives you something great you may
have to pay a price for it. You might be sorry as the Invisible Man was.
And in both Wells and Verne's work there was something I guess of the Victorian era in
there in that both of the writers seem to say at certain times that there are certain
things that man should not dabble with. Man should not play God. And this is brought forth
rather graphically in the Invisible Man where he ends up ultimately dying from him.
Be careful what you wish for you may get it. Right. Sort of an attitude.
I think of Wells and Verne both. The reason that they can be considered early science
fiction writers too is that science was really coming into its own. You know the technology
was advancing rapidly and all sorts of things were happening. It was a very exciting time
at the end of the 19th century the beginning of the 20th. And a lot of that excitement of
course is turns out in the science fiction.
There are many people writing during this time that were writing I guess what you could call lost
world type novels. Probably one of the most well known is H writer Haggard Shee which was
written in 1887. And another author who started writing along these same lines of I guess you
could call fantastic fiction more than science fiction would be the American writer Edgar
Rice Burroughs. Right he got his start or at least his beginning fame around 1911 when
he started to write some stories about a character named John Carter. The first one was titled
Under the Moons of Mars. Probably besides his Tarzan work John Carter may be his most
most famous character. You'd probably have to call that heroic fantasy I think.
There is not a lot of science in it. John Carter gets to Mars simply by wishing to be there.
And when he's on Mars many of the apparatus which fly through the sky and stuff like that are
powered by rather mysterious elements like the Eighth Ray of Barsoom and various things. But it's
it's a wonderful imaginative fiction very vivid images that Burroughs creates and a very very
unique environment. Yeah Burroughs is a natural storyteller. He may not have perhaps he hasn't
worn as well as Wells and Verne have with with serious science fiction readers but he was a
great storyteller. He could use vivid images. There are a lot of space opera elements in his
work especially the John Carter material with with Fair Maidens having to be rescued by great
heroes and bug-eyed monsters and alien environments with different colored moons and and all sorts
of things. Great ingenuity he exercised in his works and I think he also was one of the first
writers to start inventing languages and cultures and maps to go along with his created world.
The Barsoom I think is what he called Mars wasn't it? That's true. He did detail out how the planet
was as least as far as we knew at that time how the planet was set up and what the canals were
and the different types of creatures and peoples that lived on Mars and their various cultures.
He's created probably some of the most elaborate and most memorable characters that have ever been
created as far as heroes go. I mean his heroes are larger than life almost supermen Tarzan is
a character known throughout the world. Movies have been made about him incessantly.
They're working on some new ones now. He just has written some extremely vivid material.
I think with the background that we've seen in Vern and Wells works with the with boroughs we
begin to see the blend of the different kinds of styles that would later evolve into the real solid
pulp fiction pulp science fiction that we see in the 20s and 30s of America and Europe.
Right there's no real convincing science in it. It's just a great story with a
with a lot of vivid imagination in it and something that readers can follow but there's just enough
explanation for you to uh oh I don't want to accept it to want to believe it.
And he wrote many of these series books such as Tarzan and John Carter of Mars and Carcina
Venus and the Pollucador series. Some of his later work which is also popular with readers
though not as well known of course as John Carter Tarzan is at the Earth's core published around
1914 the Moon Maid in the early 30s and another one I think that was made into a movie The Land
that Time Forgot published in the mid 1920s. Boroughs also wrote many other types of works
such as Westerns and I guess what you could call a straight romance but he's most well known for
his science fiction and science fantasy stories.
It was in 1926 that fantastic literature began to separate from the literary mainstream. In that
year a man named Hugo Gernsback began publishing a pulp magazine called Amazing Stories. The
mast head of the magazine contained the word scientific fiction Gernsback's coinage. He defined
what he meant by it by scientific fiction I mean the Jules Verne H.G. Wells Edgar Allen Poe type
of a story a charming romance intermingled with science fact and prophetic vision. It wasn't
until a few years later that the term scientific fiction was changed to science fiction.
And one of the important things that happened at this time was that the American publishing
industry sort of naturally categorized itself into into sections in which there were magazines
that were devoted to different categories like there were there were magazines devoted to sports,
to war, to aviation, to adventure, to electronics and of course to science fiction.
Science fiction had its own magazines now. Gernsback's Amazing Stories was simply the first
and from then until now science fiction has had its own niche. One of the early authors'
soul stories to Gernsback and Amazing Stories was Jack Williamson. He traveled in the early part of
this century to what was then New Mexico territory. He arrived in a covered wagon. When in his teens
he began to read and write science fiction he's still living and writing high quality works.
He spoke to the science fiction radio show about his origins as a writer and about what it was like
to write for the early pulp magazines. Well I grew up on a sand hill farm in the south part of this
county when times were pretty grim and I well wanted to be some sort of scientist without any
direction or means to get a scientific education and a few months after Gernsback started the
Old Amazing where I came across some copies of it and I was immediately fascinated with
experiments that worked with travel and time and spaceships to other worlds and
all sorts of wonderful things and it's been an important share of my life ever since.
At that time he was under the influence of fantasy writer A. E. Merritt who was noted for his overly
descriptive lush prose style. That time I was infatuated with Merritt. I haven't reread him for
many years lest the spell be gone but the first stories I wrote well were full of these attempts
that had purple color illustrated with too many adjectives and later I began to try for
more convincing settings and stronger characters and fewer adjectives.
He sent a few of these early stories into Hugo Gernsback's Amazing and didn't find out that one
of them the metal man was accepted until he saw an issue of the magazine with an illustration from
his story on the cover. I wrote these stories on an old Remington basket model typewriter
and a purple ribbon and two or three of them came back one of them was with a misspelled
writing the title and the metal man never did come back and I was over at Canyon, Texas walking by
a newsstand one day and I saw my metal man on the cover of Amazing and it was quite a thrill.
He remembers the close identification and sense of community. Early science fiction
writers felt among themselves and talks about the categories of magazines published in the 1920s.
The science fiction world has always been a sort of special community where we I suppose we felt
we had our own special handle on science and the future and the shape of things to come and
though I didn't see other science fiction people very often I read their stories and read letters
in the magazines and so forth. In those days before the paperbacks and before TV and before
the comics my people read a lot more for entertainment than they do nowadays and there were really three
sorts of magazines there were the quality magazines like Harper's and those Scribner's Atlantic for
people with brains and the slicks printed printed on coated paper that would take good
advertising for people with money to spend and the props for people who hadn't neither brains
no money but we had a lot of fun in the props even if we were looked down upon widely and
eventually why science fiction got recognized as being not entirely without brains let's say
and nowadays there's a little bit of money in it sometimes. The term pulp refers to a cheaply
printed magazine done on rough paper heavy and acid content with colorful attention getting
covers. Williamson recalls that a dedicated pulp writer could earn a decent living if he worked
very hard at it. Greensbark paid a half a cent a word or less which meant well you get 25 dollars
for a short story and 75 for a novelette but Clayton paid two cents a word and up
which is one reason maybe the Clayton magazines weren't bankrupt in the Great Depression but
that meant that I could pound out 4,000 words a day for two days and earn 160 bucks which was a
fabulous feat for a farm kid in depression days. According to Williamson, Greensbark didn't always
print stories heavy with science. He was in business to interest readers and it took stories full
of adventure for that. He preached a gospel that science fiction was sugar coated science that
it was education and he got a whole panel of experts with degrees that were supposed to vet
the science and science wonder stories when he started that but actually I think that was as much
for well to impress the readers as anything else because he he did use true science in his stories
when he could get it but he also printed a lot of stories that were pretty wild. I think always in
the magazine the adventure element was more important than the science. The readers of
pulp magazines took an active interest in the material being published. They would write letters
to magazines such as Amazing with comments and suggestions. This created a sense of fellowship
among readers and was the beginning of science fiction fandom. Of course I didn't know many people
in the locality who read science fiction but in those days the backs of the magazine were filled
up with letters and tiny type from readers and that was the principal reader response.
I think the editors favored them because they didn't have to pay for the letters and they were
well interesting to us and I used to write them myself as well as read them. It was the beginning
of fandom I suppose. A term that is used to describe much of this early pulp science fiction is
space opera. Some present day readers and writers look down on space opera but Williamson disagrees.
I've never objected to space opera. I still think it's wonderful and I even think that
Star Wars could have been made out of my legion stories as well as it was from something else.
I enjoyed Star Wars tremendously as a sort of adolescent daydream and well the pulp readers
were mostly young and as naive as I was and the space opera was a sort of symbolic escape from
all sorts of things. The pulp era of science fiction didn't last. It faded out into the golden age
of science fiction when large publishing houses started issuing novels in paperback form. Williamson
thinks that there were reasons for the extinction of the pulp tradition. Probably. I was growing up
and the readers were growing up. That's something that's been going on in science fiction at least
in American science fiction all along. I think you can draw a distinction between let's say
European or mainstream science fiction on the one hand which has always been recognized and treated
as literature and the pulp American science fiction which was looked down on but as the readers of
that grew older some of them started writing some of them started editing magazines most of them out
grew science fiction but some of them didn't so there was a continual increase in the education
the sophistication and so forth of the whole field maybe you call it a diversification because
there's still a readership for Edgar R. S. Burris and Robert E. Howard and whatever but
there are also people who let's say former fans who are now academic fans who are teaching science
fiction courses and and writing scholarly articles on science fiction to meet the publisher
Paris test and so forth so that essentially the field is just diversified into all sorts of
levels and areas of interest
this is David Cruz Daryl Lane and David Carson this has been the science fiction radio show
a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCVFM
and Odessa College Odessa Texas